# Introduction
<audio controls="1"> <source src="audio/mp3/00013-introduction.md.plain.mp3" type="audio/mpeg"></source> </audio>

This document is a report on my experimentation with USDT tracing, particularly
how it can be used to provide deeper insights into high-level languages like
Ruby.

## USDT - Userspace Statically Defined Tracepoints

USDT tracepoints are a powerful tool that gained popularity with `dtrace`.

In short, USDT tracepoints allow you to build-in diagnostics at key points of
an application.

These can be used for debugging the application, measuring the performance
characteristics, or analyzing any aspect of the runtime state of the program.

USDT tracepoints are placed within your code, and are executed when:

* They have been explicitly enabled.
* A tracing program, such as `bpftrace` or `dtrace` is connected to it.

## Portability

Originally limited to BSD, Solaris, and other systems with `dtrace`, it is now
simple to use USDT tracepoints on Linux. `systemtap` for linux has produced
`sys/sdt.h` that can be used to add dtrace probes to linux applications written
in C/C++, and for dynamic languages `libstapsdt` [@libstapsdt] can be used to
add static tracepoints using whatever C extension framework is available for
the language runtime. To date, there are wrappers for golang, Python, NodeJS,
and a Ruby [@ruby-static-tracing] wrapper under development.

`bpftrace`'s similarity to `dtrace` allows for USDT tracepoints to be
accessible throughout the lifecycle of an application.

While more-and-more developers use Linux, there are still a large
representation of Apple laptops for professional workstations. Many such
enterprises also deploy production code to Linux systems. In such situations,
developers can benefit from the insights that `dtrace` tracepoints have to
offer them on their workstation as they are writing code. Once the code is
ready to be shipped, the tracepoints can simply be left in the application.
When it comes time to debug or analyze the code in production, the very same
toolchain can be applied by translating `dtrace`'s `.dt` scripts into
`bpftrace`'s `.bt scripts.

## Performance

Critically, USDT tracepoints have little to no impact on performance if they
are not actively being used, as it very simple to check if a static tracepoint
has a probe attached to it.

This makes USDT tracepoints great to deploy surgically, rather than
the conventional "always on" diagnostics. Logging data and emitting metrics do
have some runtime overhead, and it is constant. The overhead that USDT
tracepoints have is minimal, and limited to when they are actively being used
to help answer a question about the behavior of an application.
